---
title: Tutorial - Content Negotiation
layout: tutorial
---
# Content Negotiation

HTTP supports a rich set of methods to negotiate the representation of
a resource. The client tells the server its preferences on
media-type, character set, content encoding and language and the
server uses this information to select the best representation
available.

## Negotiating a media type

A typical use case with liberator is the support of multiple media
types. Out of the box, liberator supports response generation for
arbitrary clojure values such as JSON, clojure forms and some others. You
can also return a String, File or InputStream from a handler which
will be returned basically literally.

If you want to negotiate on the media type, then define the key
 ````:available-media-types```` which must return a list of the
 supported media-type (or be a function which returns the list at
 runtime). Liberator will then determine, based on this list and the
request header ````Accept````, which is the best media type available.

Liberator will store the media type in the representation map in the
context. This map is available in the context at the key
````:representation````. You can use the values in any handler
function that is called _after_ the media type was evaluated. This
is done in the decision called ````:media-type-available?````.

<div class="alert alert-info">You can also specify a function for the
key :media-type-available? instead of :available-media-types. The
default implementation uses :available-media-types to gain a list of
possible types does the negotiation with the Accept-Header and stores
the outcome in the representation map. This is in most cases more
convenient than doing this manually.</div>

An example will illustrate how things fit together:

{% highlight clojure %}
  (ANY "/babel" []
       (resource :available-media-types ["text/plain" "text/html"
                                         "application/json" "application/clojure;q=0.9"]
                 :handle-ok
                 #(let [media-type
                        (get-in % [:representation :media-type])]
                    (condp = media-type
                      "text/plain" "You requested plain text"
                      "text/html" "<html><h1>You requested HTML</h1></html>"
                      {:message "You requested a media type"
                       :media-type media-type}))
                 :handle-not-acceptable "Uh, Oh, I cannot speak those languages!"))
{% endhighlight %}

## Playtime

Let's try some request

{% highlight bash session %}
$ curl -v http://localhost:3000/babel
* About to connect() to localhost port 3000 (#0)
*   Trying ::1...
* connected
* Connected to localhost (::1) port 3000 (#0)
> GET /babel HTTP/1.1
> User-Agent: curl/7.24.0 (x86_64-apple-darwin12.0) libcurl/7.24.0 OpenSSL/0.9.8r zlib/1.2.5
> Host: localhost:3000
> Accept: */*
>
< HTTP/1.1 200 OK
< Date: Tue, 23 Apr 2013 06:49:54 GMT
< Vary: Accept
< Content-Type: text/plain;charset=UTF-8
< Content-Length: 24
< Server: Jetty(7.6.1.v20120215)
<
* Connection #0 to host localhost left intact
You requested plain text* Closing connection #0
{% endhighlight %}

You can see that curl sent an ````Accept````-Header of "*/*" which means
that it accepts any media type. In this case, liberator will return
the first available media type.

Let's try to be more specific and tell that we accept json and clojure
but prefer clojure. (This was expected, right?)

{% highlight bash session %}
url -v -H "Accept: application/json=0.8,application/clojure" http://localhost:3000/babel
* About to connect() to localhost port 3000 (#0)
*   Trying ::1...
* connected
* Connected to localhost (::1) port 3000 (#0)
> GET /babel HTTP/1.1
> User-Agent: curl/7.24.0 (x86_64-apple-darwin12.0) libcurl/7.24.0 OpenSSL/0.9.8r zlib/1.2.5
> Host: localhost:3000
> Accept: application/json=0.8,application/clojure
>
< HTTP/1.1 200 OK
< Date: Tue, 23 Apr 2013 06:52:32 GMT
< Vary: Accept
< Content-Type: application/clojure;charset=UTF-8
< Content-Length: 117
< Server: Jetty(7.6.1.v20120215)
<
* Connection #0 to host localhost left intact
#=(clojure.lang.PersistentArrayMap/create {:message "You requested a media type", :media-type "application/clojure"})* Closing connection #0
{% endhighlight %}

You can see that we received a clojure representation. The
representation was automatically generated by liberator from the
clojure map that was returned from the handler method.

So, what happens if we request some media-type which is not available?
As you can guess, liberator will finally use
````:handle-not-acceptable```` to generate a 406 response:

{% highlight bash session %}
curl -v -H 'Accept: image/png' http://localhost:3000/babel
* About to connect() to localhost port 3000 (#0)
*   Trying ::1...
* connected
* Connected to localhost (::1) port 3000 (#0)
> GET /babel HTTP/1.1
> User-Agent: curl/7.24.0 (x86_64-apple-darwin12.0) libcurl/7.24.0 OpenSSL/0.9.8r zlib/1.2.5
> Host: localhost:3000
> Accept: image/png
>
< HTTP/1.1 406 Not Acceptable
< Date: Tue, 23 Apr 2013 06:58:15 GMT
< Content-Type: text/plain;charset=UTF-8
< Content-Length: 39
< Server: Jetty(7.6.1.v20120215)
<
* Connection #0 to host localhost left intact
Uh, Oh, I cannot speak those languages!* Closing connection #0
{% endhighlight %}

## Vary 

If you watched closely then you observed that liberator automatically
returns a value for the ````Vary```` header. The value of the header
is filled from the negotiated parameters in the representation map.
If you negotiated on e.g. media-type and language then it will be set
to ````Accept, Accept-Language````. The header is used by caching
proxies and caching user agents to tell apart different representation of
the same resource. Thus it is vital that it is set correctly. If not,
clients will receive cached values in the wrong media-type and worse.

## More negotiable parameters

Liberator supports negotiation for the headers ````Accept```` (media-type),
````Accept-Language````, ````Accept-Charset```` and
````Accept-Encoding````. The negotiated values are stored in the
representation map at the keys ````:media-type````, ````:language````,
````:charset```` and ````:encoding````.

If a handler returns a string for the representation then liberator
will return an inputstream for a bytestream representation of the
string in the negotiated character set. You can use ````(keys
(java.nio.charset.Charset/availableCharsets))```` to obtain the
supported character sets on your platform.

<div class="alert alert-info">Automatic character encoding is only
supported if a handler returns a string value. If it returns an
inputstream then liberator expect it to be already encoded
correctly. Re-encoding is, while technically possible, in general
a costly and unnecessary operation. In the case that you absolutely
need it you can re-encode an inputstream in the handler.</div>

The parameter ````:encoding```` has no further support from liberator.
While content-encoding will typically be done by a reverse proxy in front
of your application, nothing prevents you to return a compressed
representation in the handler if requested.
